Hey there, welcome to the Posit Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12pm US Eastern Time. If
you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I am so excited to introduce our featured leader today, Mike
Thomson, Data Science Manager at Flatiron Health. Mike, hi, how are you doing? Hey everyone,
how are you doing? I'm doing well. This is my first time showing up in this big of a
data science hangout. It's been a little bit since I was on the last one, but it's
really good to be here and see you all. It is. Yes, we've grown. We keep creeping further
and further over that 100 mark, 150 mark every time we meet. Well, Mike, it would be great
if you could tell us a little bit about what you do and something that you like to do for
fun. Yeah, definitely. I am a Data Science Manager at Flatiron Health. We are in the
real-world evidence space, and I support a team of roughly 100 data scientists across
research science and data analytics who use a lot of our tooling internally in the Posit
team platform. I just got a golden retriever puppy who is four months old, and that is
my part-time job at this point of training and just really enjoying having a puppy. It's
my childhood dream come true. Oh my goodness. Oh my gosh, I love it. I'm looking for Mike
in the chat window as well. I don't see him. I'm hoping for a teddy appearance. We have
lots of puppies at the hangout, which makes me very happy. I wanted to ask a little bit
more about Flatiron itself. I know that Flatiron is a subsidiary of Roche, but you operate
independently. Because we're coming from all these different industries, who doesn't
understand or know the healthcare space, can you talk a little bit more and explain it
to me like I'm five details about what Flatiron does and what your teams do? Yeah, exactly.
Flatiron has been around for over 10 years. The initial idea is it has an oncology-specific
medical record software, very similar to Epic or Cerner, but it's targeted towards community
oncology practices that are treating patients all across America and increasingly global
in their community oncology setting. We have real-time data being collected of a really
diverse patient population. Correspondingly, we're able to do a lot of research after de-identifying
those patient records to be able to understand what treatment patterns are we seeing real-time,
real-world, separate from, for example, the big academic medical practices that may have
different patient populations and different treatment norms accordingly. We're really
trying to learn from the experience of every patient with cancer across the U.S., across the
world, and glean a lot of different scientific insights from those really rich data sources and
really rich patient experiences. Could you give us a few examples, speaking of the data that
you're working with, the data types that you're working with, or maybe the types of data sets or
collections that you might be working with? Are they patient-level? One row is one patient. Do
you have visual data? Yeah, we have mostly, because it's the EHR, electronic healthcare record,
it's mostly structured patient records. You could have things like visits information,
this patient was seen on this date and received this treatment. We could also have different
clinical notes that we can extract and say, do they have this specific subtype of cancer,
and correspondingly be able to analyze based on that. We're actually very fortunate as scientists
and analysts to have pre-cleaned data sets. I think one of the unique part of Flatiron's model
is how can we transform and aggregate all of those source-level information from the EHR into
analytic-ready data sets that allow scientists to take those and generate insights a lot faster.
It would be anything from one row per patient demographics, descriptors of state, gender,
that sort of thing, and then it can be really detailed. Here are the
characteristics therein. I broke up just a little bit there. I don't know if it was me
or if it was anybody else. I wanted to ask as well, do you have longitudinal data? Do you follow
patients across time ever for long-term studies, or is this just observational data?
It is observational, but it's relatively longitudinal. Of course, you're subject to
what patients are receiving. Obviously, a patient with cancer, we don't want them to have
really long treatments if they're progressing well. Ultimately, we are subject to
records that are being seen. It's not like a clinical trial registry where we're proactively
collecting data, except for some parts of the business model. It's typically observational,
and the idea is how can you complement the data that may be collected in a clinical trial with
observational data in the real world. Okay, great. That makes perfect sense.
I wanted to sort of do a little bit of context building for everybody so that we can ask
Mike the best questions and talk about a couple of topics that could be good.
I want to ask Mike about quarto, and we have some team members for Mike's team to help chime in and
talk about that, because I am really, really invested in quarto having better outputs into
Word and Excel. When I work in Word and Excel, I tend to actually go back and use our markdown,
so I can use the officer package or the office verse to do stuff like that.
I would love to talk about that. If anybody out there in the Hangout world
also still finds themselves really, really frequently needing to output things to Word
and Excel, even though the rest of the developer world feels like they've moved on from that,
I really would love to talk about that, so throw your support behind that in Slido.
Another thing is that you oversee people who make tools, and I love making tools. I'm very
tool-oriented. I feel like I've been told my whole life, quit worrying about the tools,
just worry about the outcome. I'm like, but I really love the tools, so that would be a great
thing to ask Mike about, and then also advocating for using open source tools. If you are out there
listening to the Hangout, and you're like, I would love to use open source tools instead of this
proprietary point-and-click software that I have to use, maybe we could talk a little bit about
that. All right, so let's go ahead and take a look at Slido here, and I saw that Jacob had a question
that came in early on. Jacob Lackey, if you are available to ask that question live, we can find
you and help you unmute. Yeah, can you hear me? There he is. Hey, Jacob. Hey, how you doing? Hey,
Mike, I'm just wondering if you're aware of any computer vision applications in the healthcare
industry from your perspective. Are you guys doing anything with that, like using OpenCV and Python
or RoboFlow to any extent? It's definitely not within my wheelhouse and not something I'm
familiar with. There may be other folks who are, but unfortunately I can't speak to them.
Okay, all right, thank you. That's a good question. I had the same question. That's why I asked, like,
do you get any visual data? Especially with cancer, I feel like there's all kinds of scans and things
that get, you know, we even get diagnostic, regular diagnostic work just as regular humans
to look for cancer and stuff. So great, fantastic question. All right. I can add a little bit to you.
There are other data types that we do have. They just aren't core to my day-to-day and what my team
directly supports, but I agree. In the cancer space, imaging is super important. Genomics is
super important. And I think there is a large appetite and interest in thinking about how can
we add on those dimensions and multimodal data layers to have a more complete or a deeper picture
within the journey of the patients with cancer. So definitely to say it exists and it's extremely
important. I likely just don't have enough direct experience to articulate specifically the tools
there. Totally fair. We can't all have the direct experience and all the stuff. But if anybody wants
to chime in from the chat, any question that gets posed to Mike is really, like, a question we can
all talk about in the chat. If you have any experience with computer vision stuff with
healthcare or diagnostics, I would love to see it. Share some info for us. Okay. So there was a
question in the chat that was anonymous or not in the chat, in the Slido, that sort of touched on my
question about longitudinal data, which was, do you use, like, mixed models or Bayesian MCMC,
which is Monte Carlo, in what you do? Or anybody in your team uses that?
I don't, specifically. I think a lot of the baseline that we can do is mostly descriptive
statistics in that a lot of the directional insights we can get are, for example, looking at
treatment patterns over time, survival patterns, looking at follow-up and patient journeys. That's
at least the core baseline of what we can do. That said, there are a lot of great scientists
at Plattern Health who do think about more advanced methods than I do, but I just haven't been hands-on in that space.
No worries. I saw a question from, let's see, I want to remind, hey, Nick, I saw you asked a question
in Slido, but it doesn't actually have any question in it. So you might want to go add to it or
moderate it. All right. So I wanted to ask about Corto before we got too much further, because
I'm seeing some support for this in the chat. How does your team use Corto? That would be a good way
to get started. Yeah, we use Markdown for a very long time, and we're a relatively small team.
We're roughly anywhere between two to four people who are supporting our tooling ecosystem for a
team of, as I mentioned, a hundred data scientists, data analysts. And so we really have to be precise
on where we focus our energy and what tools we want to build when. I think we had a narrative of
our Markdown works really well. To your point, if we're looking to create word outputs in the
officer ecosystem is extremely impressive and allows us to do that really well, at least for
word outputs. At some point, Corto kind of became the mainstream and we said, okay, should we switch
to this? And one of the main drivers for doing that is that one, it's where a lot of support has
been thrown in building up that ecosystem. And two, it relatively easily allows us to output
multiple formats at the same time, which is honestly magical. So for example, we could use
Posit Connect as a way to publish reproducibly our analyses and generate an HTML that's
visible by our clinicians that our scientists are working with and sharing insights with.
But at the same time, there's also a Word doc that can be downloaded in the click of a button.
And that Word doc is typically what is shared with our research partners or
our customers with whom we're delivering analytic reports. And so it allows us flexibility to
easily have the same source code and then leave kind of the rendering details and formatting
details mostly to a Word template and Corto on the backend. So it took us a bit to get there,
but once we did and we worked with a wonderful team at Plymouth Analytics to kind of lay the
foundation of how we would use Corto in our day-to-day work. Oh, that's such a great call out for
like bringing in a third party that specializes in that type of stuff. I've worked with groups
like that. They're amazing. If you don't know that that exists, there are groups that will help you
or help your team figure out a workflow that works for you and sort of templatize things
or even help you build themes, color schemes, all of that stuff. I know that one of your team members
is here, Erica. I don't know if Erica wanted to hop in and add anything about the Corto to Word
and Corto to Excel journey and what that looks like. Sure. Yeah, I sit on Mike's team and one of
the larger projects that I've been working on is creating a function in R to allow for to easily
output analytic tables from Corto to Excel and kind of getting the formatting of that as well.
Most of our services teams are generating analytic outputs with like dozens to hundreds of tables
and as those analyses get more complex in Word, it's really hard to maintain formatting,
which is one of the reasons why we're pushing towards using Excel for our analytic outputs only.
But unfortunately, there's not like a native way to output formatted tables from Corto to Excel.
So we have been using the FlexLSX package along with FlexTable to easily output formatted tables
from a Corto doc to Excel and the function that we built pretty easily fits into our current workflow
and some of the other functions that we've built to generate those initial tables in R.
Yeah, and then using FlexLSX in our internal like output Excel function has allowed us to
output to essentially like an Excel template similar to what a Word template would be.
Yeah, I know these struggles. I know these struggles so well. And Luke was saying there's
also OpenXLSX2. There are a few different packages that have been helpful. I'm sure
that you guys have gone through and kind of vetted and tested a lot of things, huh?
Yeah, we're also using OpenXLSX2. I think some of the formatting in OpenXLSX2
is a little manual. So we already had like pre-existing formatted FlexTables
and the FlexLSX table allows us to like persist that formatting into the Excel output rather than
having to manually do it, especially since our tables have varying numbers of columns and rows
and headers. The FlexLSX package allows us to just take the existing formatting and basically paste
it into Excel. That's awesome. Yeah, that formatting is the big, is like the bugbear,
that's like really, really hard to keep going. And also, if anyone's ever needed to put something
into Word over and over again, Word does not allow you to change its default table template,
which is really frustrating to me. You can change your styling on your table, but the default one
that your table uses over and over again, you can't modify. I don't know if you guys have dug
into like the OpenXML, all of that stuff that goes into like the back end of Word and Excel
and stuff. But this is a really interesting topic. I'm seeing a lot of stuff in the chat.
There's more stuff. Javier added an example of formatting Excel to GT Summary plus OpenXLSX,
which is really interesting. Go check that out. But I wanted to hop over back to Slido
and take a look at the questions that we have rolling in.
Noor, you asked one about open source. Would you like to ask that one live?
If we can find Noor. There she is. Hello. Sorry, let me like dig up the question I asked it.
I highlighted it in Slido and I'll stick it in the chat as well right now.
Okay. So basically, how do you convince stakeholders of the value of going open
source instead of sticking with their continual contractual things with proprietary tools? And
secondly, how do you handle security concerns with sensitive data and open source? Because
I used to work as a contractor and that was often a concern of like, well, we know how this works.
We really want to go into open source and so forth.
Yeah, really good question. I think I come from a place of privilege in that fire and in 2016 made
a very intentional decision. And I think the people who made this decision that we wanted to
be open source first and using R as a baseline, because we had the privilege of being a new
company to define how we wanted to operate. And I think part of it too is we're a tech company
in the healthcare space. And correspondingly, you have a little bit of different attitudes
on where you want to start. That said, I think you do end up investing a lot more in risk control
frameworks, security review processes, et cetera, in order to make those viable, safe and secure.
Because at the end of the day, patient safety and scientific integrity is paramount to what we do.
And so one of the things we've invested in a fair amount is working with our quality team to define
and security team to define processes and review necessary before integrating open source tools.
So I think there's a whole area of conversation there and that don't necessarily need to get into
here, but it just requires careful consideration. I'll give you an example for something like the
Flex LSX and OpenXL. I always forget exactly what the package is named. But before in taking
those into our system, we did a review of, for example, how many dependencies does this bring in?
Is the maintainer relatively active? Are we introducing business risk by taking on a dependency
from open source? Because sometimes you find a magical package in the wild that does exactly
everything you need, but it hasn't been touched in a very long time. And you're introducing either
security risk because there isn't active development or you're introducing technical
risk over time and maintenance burden. So our team tries to be fairly intentional around what we
decide to use when. And one of the things we love about open source is you can see what's going on.
And generally, if it's a very actively maintained area, then if issues do come up and it's well used,
then a lot of folks will jump onto that and help support and iron out those wrinkles. And so that's
why we try to really, again, anchor to those that are widely used and will have had a lot of those
issues vetted already or will continue to be vetted as they come up going forward. So that's a little
bit on the topic. And we just try to be intentional and grateful, especially for those in the open
source community who have already paved that path because it's not always an easy journey.
Yeah, we're all thankful for our open source heroes. That actually brings up a great topic
because I think that your team and people in your team under you contribute to open source
and the open source ecosystem. I know that you had mentioned a few packages. What were the
packages? I know one was dbFlyer. Yeah, I can give an opening to Anthony, who's on our team here.
One of the things we've all probably felt when trying to use an open source library is
we don't exactly know which aspects of it are well-supported. And so you may think,
oh, this should work off the shelf. And thankfully, someone has already solved that
problem really well for you. And other times, you're the first person to think about that
problem or use that backend that hasn't yet been paved. And so when we started a translation from,
we went from using Redshift to Snowflake, we were using dbFlyer really heavily on Redshift as a way
to pre-process some of the data in SQL, and then we went to Snowflake. And I'll let Anthony describe
the experience from there. I think this was at a time when I was relatively new to R as well.
So it was a bit of a baptism by fire to learn R while learning the innards of the dbFlyer package.
Definitely diving into the deep end, but effective, I think. Effective. So over the course
of a few months, we were able to work with the Tidyverse team to develop a set of translations
from R to SQL, and we contributed those to the package. And they're in pretty prevalent use at
this point. And I think we can be proud of that. So I'm excited. Yeah, no kidding. That's amazing.
I cannot imagine learning R at the same time as learning the innards of a package.
What was your background before R, Anthony? Some Python. Some Python.
Some Python. Well, that's really inspiring. Do you have any tips for anybody who's like,
I really want to get started with contributing to open source? How can I do it? Do you recommend
the deep end? Like, I have a problem that exists that this package could almost solve,
but it doesn't, and trying to help add that? Yeah, for sure. I'm not sure if it's my
personality type or just general guidance, but I find it most useful to have a problem that I
really need to solve if I need to, when developing a tool. Yeah, same. Or at least something that
you're really interested in doing. I see Marcos adding support to that with a reaction. Mike,
do you have anything to add on to that, like getting started with contributing?
From a management standpoint, do you allow people to have a certain amount of time in their day or
in their week or month to contribute back to open source? Or does it need to be really focused on
problems that Flatiron is solving? Yeah, it's a tough one, right? We're
all busy with our day jobs, and the question is, where do you focus your energy always?
And we generally try to, I don't want to say limit, but focus on, would this be critical for
us to be able to move forward again? Because we're a fairly lean team. We don't have a lot of latitude
to carve out as much free capacity as we would likely like. And so we've tried to be intentional
around, let's say we're doing a big migration, a snowflake, this isn't really helpful to do this,
then it's also a great opportunity for someone like Anthony or me or Erica to jump in and try
to solve that problem, not only on behalf of us, but also others who may encounter this problem
going forward. So I think it's like, when we need to, we definitely are willing to,
and make sure we work with our legal and privacy team to share any considerations for where we give
back. But I think importantly, I learned too, even just opening an issue or sharing feedback
or discussing with people is a form of contribution. I've had some amazing conversations,
even at Posit Conference, where you ask a question of, I'm trying to think about this,
and they say, please open an issue. And it's not so much that you're complaining, but you're just
sharing ideas and sharing feedback that, for example, you may have a system internally that
others don't have access to, and you can help cross those communication gaps via GitHub or via
that open source community. It is such a great point to make that opening an issue or just asking
a question can be so super helpful, because you might be starting a conversation, and there could
be people out there in the dev team that have been thinking about it too, and have just needed the
push to sort of push it over the edge. That happened just this year with Tidyverse, actually
with dplyr. There were some kind of holes in dplyr where it was not as easy as it probably should
have been to modify a column based on the values in another column or based on the values in a
named list or a named vector. And people in the community started talking about it, posting about
it, asking questions about it, and it turned out that the Tidyverse dev team was like, we've already
been thinking about this. Now that we have all of these issues popping up, let's do it and put it
in there. And so those functions now have been put out and exist. So it really does matter.
All right. I wanted to call in somebody from Slido, because Nick, you fixed your question.
It contains a question. Now, Nick Drew, if you are available to ask live, that'd be great.
And if not, I can ask for you.
Hi, Libby. Can you hear me?
Hey, I can.
Great. Yeah, I think parts of my question were answered a little bit before,
but I'll just go ahead and ask it. Mike, thanks for joining us today. Really good information.
It sounded like you have some folks that you oversee or supervise, and it wasn't clear to me
whether they report directly to you or there's a matrix reporting relationship. But I just wanted
to understand a little bit about your support model for that group. When people use desktop
applications and open source software, oftentimes people come up, as we've been talking about,
come up with their own ways of doing things. And so how does that support look like?
Yeah, it's really evolved over... I've been at Flutter and Health for six years,
and we've really tried to iterate and learn from different ownership and support models.
I'll share with where I am or where we started and then paint the picture to where we are now.
As a team of scientists, we are not always software engineers at our core.
And so correspondingly, figuring out who supports the R installation scripts that we all have,
or who supports the libraries that we may or may not have created on a one-off.
We at some point said, okay, we're at a team where we want to be able to manage some things
more centrally, and how do we do that? So we created what was called, and I would give a
shout out to Nathaniel Phillips, who's not here, who created the R Enablement Initiative,
to think about a dedicated core set of maintainers who can support that ecosystem.
And so I think that's kind of a core principle where we've kept. We have a core set of tooling
maintainers and a core set of tooling users. And I view that really as a gradient along a hub and
spoke. The maintainers are really the hub where we can support and make sure we're prioritizing
the things that can impact the most users across the most use cases. The spoke may be, I have a
one-off analysis where I want to contribute a function, or I want to create something that's
really not necessarily applicable to everyone, and we would push that support out to the spoke.
So currently, I manage two teams, a team of data analysts who are primary users,
and a team of data scientists, including Erika, who are supporting our core tooling ecosystem.
And we found that generally to be a really helpful model where our users are focused on either
execution or science or analytics, and their goal is to be empowered with the tools they need to do
their work really well. And our team of maintainers are aligned with the incentives to say we need to
empower our users, our analysts, our scientists, to use those tools really well. And so we are always
trying to build tools that empower our users hand-in-hand. The other thing I would say is
we have an engineering platform team who supports our Posit team infrastructure and manages Workbench,
Package Manager, and Connect alongside our core tooling team to make sure our platform supports
our tooling maintainers who ultimately support our users using the platform and the tools.
This is such a big topic. And there was one more question, anonymous one on Slido that I saw that
was along these lines, and it also had a reply that was like, hey, let me add to this. So let's
add it on here. The anonymous question said, did you say you manage about 100 data scientists,
or did I mishear that? If so, how does that look? I think you just talked about that.
I do not manage 100 data scientists. I manage a subset of those. There were some wonderful managers
and some great people across the organization. Our tooling team is roughly two to four people
at any point, and our data analytics team is more in the range of 10, but our broader scientific
org who is using the platforms is in the realm of 100. Okay. That makes total sense. The add-on
question to that was, do you have any tips for asynchronous working? How do you communicate
with your team? And I think that there was another question somewhere in here that was about
communication as well. So if I can find that, I might add it on.
In terms of communication, we generally use Slack a fair amount as our way to
intake and triage, which maybe gets to the second part of that question. In interfacing with users,
especially if they're less technical or not excited about the technical details,
having a quick way to iterate and get down to the root issue to unblock them is so helpful,
because ultimately they're not necessarily sure which question to ask, or they see an error
message in the package and not necessarily clear where to go from there and what team to escalate
to. So we really try to first triage, and then second, determine when we need to solve
and what the urgency is back to that user, back to that use case. So we try to be fairly
cooperative with the users and within our teams to make sure we're always communicating on what
needs to happen when. Is there anything besides Slack? Are you like a Jira team or an Asana team
for assigning tasks or tickets? We do use GitLab internally and use issues as a way to track across
our internal libraries and development in the same way most folks would use GitHub. We also use
Jira as a team to operationalize against some of those developments. So we're trying to say
across these next two weeks in the spring, what do we want to focus on? What are the areas that
we want to deliver as a team, in addition to balancing our inbound user support workflows
as well that mostly come in through Slack and may get ticketed in Jira or GitHub or GitLab.
Okay, awesome. Yeah, Nora is saying GitHub projects is also super useful.
I will second and third that. I love collaborating on GitHub. I've never used
GitLab. I'm guessing it's very similar with the project structure. But yeah, I feel like some of
my most successful projects have just been managed completely on GitHub and it was such
a wonderful experience as long as you have somebody who's a great project manager working
on it. Well, there's a question in Slido that I saw that we could probably knock out really quick,
rapid fire style, because I think you answered it. It was how many people on your platform team
to support Posit teams? So Workbench, Connect, Package Manager, is that that team of tooling
people that's about four people? We support typically the user or application specific
aspects of that. And our engineers would support more of the Docker Kubernetes configuration.
There is a platform team who supports a bunch of different core development tools,
and they are more in the range of four plus engineers, but they're not full time on Posit
team. I think generally, as we stood up Posit team, we invested a lot more upfront to get
something working and get our configurations where we wanted it to be. And over time,
you can shift into more steady state maintenance, quarterly updates, that sort of thing.
Okay, great. Let me take a look at Slido here because we have so many questions that rolled
in. We will definitely not be able to answer all of them in 20 minutes that we have left.
But let's see if we can get a few of them in there. One of them that I thought was interesting,
Hubert Hickman had asked. I will highlight that in Slido so that everybody can see it.
And if he is available, you can ask. And Cecilia had asked a follow up question to this. I have
the same question. Yes. Hello. Thank you. I work for the University of Chicago, Data for the Common
Good. We're the home of the Pediatric Cancer Data Commons. And I've been in the clinical research
informatics space since 1993. And so a long time warping around things. I've been using ours since
2017, but mostly are in Python, a mix between the two these days of what I end up doing.
But my question is, when you talked about analyzing the documents, is there a tool set that
works for these things? You know, there's like C takes and deep fee and those sorts of things.
Everybody's, of course, a little gaga about LLMs to do entity recognition and things in the
documents. But, you know, that's mixed results and you've got to have one handy if you're sending
an identified data. It has to be in a secure space and all that. So what does your team use
for those sorts of situations that work? Yeah. And again, I'm probably the wrong person to speak
to the actual extraction process from documents. We have a lot of really good engineers, both just
in terms of data processing and in terms of extraction from those records. As data
scientists, we're pretty privileged to be able to look at the transformed extractive loaded views of
what those records are. So I don't think I'll be able to answer your question, unfortunately.
That's OK. And the follow up question from Cecilia was, Hubert, what do you mean by notes data? I
think what you're meaning is just the unstructured text to data that accompanies medical records,
right? Yeah. A lot of it is unstructured. Still, there's kind of the things like laboratory data
that's structured. You know, here's the long, here's the coding, here's the range, here's
this very sort of structured. There's some note data that comes in that has structured elements
with it. Some things are available, sort of a structured XML as a side effect of how reports
are generated in health care space. And then there's just text stuff that a lot of it's still
that that comes in. And that can be procedure notes or encounter summaries, all those types
of information. Well, this is a great question. If there's anybody in the chat who has information
about this or experience with this, let us know in the chat so we can talk more about it. And
then maybe in a future Hangout, we can even talk more about it. Alrighty, let's take a look back
at Slido. How many more questions can we fit into our last 20 minutes here? I had a handful of
anonymous questions. One of them I would love to ask because it was about getting into the industry.
Here we go. It says, hey, Mike, it's anonymous. I'm a data analyst working in other industry,
but interested in getting into the health industry. So how important is domain knowledge
in your recruitment? Good question. I can just give a little bit of background on how I entered
this space. My background is in science, math, chemistry, a little bit of economics. And I was
always passionate about at one point, I thought I would be a doctor and or a dentist or veterinarian.
But at some point, I realized my passion is doing that behind the scenes, doing the math,
doing the modeling, analyzing the data and being able to tell that patient narrative in a different
way. So for me, I was always curious on how I could apply that science and healthcare within
the analytics base accordingly. So I went into economic consulting out of grad school and was
doing a lot of health insurance litigation and decided rather than focusing on how much to pay
claims, I wanted to dive deeper into what is the clinical patient journey that supports those.
And so fortunately, I was able to shift into Flatiron Health and dive deeper into the space.
I think that sort of depends on the role that you're entering. Some roles can be really domain
agnostic. And let's say it's more specialized in the example that Hubert gave, maybe you're an
expert in extracting unstructured records. And that can be within finance reports, it can be
within healthcare records. And you can still apply that internal to different industries.
But there are other areas where let's say you're interested in epidemiology and modeling of
scientific methods, then having that domain expertise and experience is pretty critical for
you to be impactful in the role you enter. So I think something I always value is curiosity
and willingness to learn. And for certain data analytics teams, you don't necessarily need to
have that clinical experience to do the analytics aspects of it well that support the business and
support your stakeholders. So I think it's just important in the interviewing conversation
process of understand how much is needed for the role and what do you bring to the table.
And if it's a role that you really want, figuring out if there are ways to close those gaps either
on the job or in your own learning or in a different path towards that position.
So I'm always a learner and advocate for learning. But I think at the end of the day,
I support people finding creative paths as well.
There are so many winding paths that lead to data science you would not believe.
I think getting involved in the communities that are around healthcare and health and life sciences
and pharma is also a really great way to learn more about the area. So the R in Medicine conference
is so amazing. It's all virtual. It's full of workshops that you can take to learn from.
Our pharma is an amazing conference. And then also going to PositConf and meeting all of the
many people in the healthcare space that are going to be there. Many of them are in this
hangout right now and they're going to be there in person or virtually. So that's my two cents
that nobody asked for, but definitely go do that. And there was a question in Slido.
Oops, Slido is moving around on me as you all add questions. That was about electronic health
records. It says, as someone who is not familiar with U.S. electronic health records, how much
data cleaning is involved in transferring medical notes into your database and are they relatively
clean and easily ingested? I think that Mike covered this with that they get clean data,
right? But I would like to spin this question and ask, where do you store all of this stuff?
Are you using Snowflake? Are you using Databricks, like a catalog? I have worked at places who store
enormous records in ancient IBM, like Netezza, which is very slow. I would love to hear about
how your team handles things or how Flatiron does. Yeah, I think there's a whole area in
data pipelining and ingestion here that happens before we get to the point of data science.
I want to shout out to a lot of good engineers and a lot of good architects who have figured
out how to do that securely, scalably, et cetera. And at the point of data science,
we typically have in Snowflake, importantly, de-identified patient records that we're then
able to use. So as an analyst, we're pretty unified into the tech stack that we can connect
to Snowflake, have reasonably well-structured data and focus on doing the science at that point.
So most of it would live in AWS S3 if it's source data and or Snowflake if it's analytic data.
And you said that you were previously on Redshift, right?
Yeah, we were. Okay. I wish I knew more about all of this. I don't know if anybody else in the chat
can identify with this, but like being a data scientist that feels like they don't know a ton
about data storage and databases, I have lots of FOMO, like data engineering FOMO. If anybody,
oh yeah, I was just going to say, if anybody has experienced Netezza, it looks like Felipe has.
It says Netezza is a classic warehouse though. Yeah, classic is the word. All right. Thank you,
Mike, for answering that. And for the anonymous question asker who asked an anonymous question
for us, we have a whole bunch more and only 12 minutes to go. So let me look through Slido here.
There was one that was about timelines. There it is. I'm going to highlight it so it goes to the top.
And it's, what is the approximate timeline from the time you do analysis to final deployment of
results in the real world? I think that that's a really interesting question. For everybody in
the chat to chime in, what do timelines look like for you? And Mike, I don't know if you're
close enough to the analysis at this point to answer, but I will forward this to you and maybe
you can call in Anthony or Kim as well. Yeah. I mean, it really, as a former economist, I just
would say it depends on a lot of different things, the complexity, the depth, the amount of
pre-specification you've done in the study. I think we can generate pretty quick insights. Let's
say you're trying to get directional estimates of number of patients who received a drug with
a given diagnosis. That's something we can turn around and share in hours at max. But let's say
you're trying to do a really detailed time to event or covariate adjusted analyses or patient
matching, then that's something we want to be really rigorous around pre-specifying that analysis,
understanding what covariates you care about, understanding the data model and treatment
setting in which you're studying before then executing, which is typically at that point,
the shorter aspect of it. So I think one thing that we really try to bake into our timelines is
quality control, scientific rigor, and that sort of thing. And correspondingly, it can
increase your timelines, but for the right reasons. So those analyses can be, again,
if it's really fast in the realm of maybe a day or maybe a week, or maybe it's actually a
three-month study that requires a lot of stakeholder engagement and feedback with your partners.
So that's my best guess. All right. Thank you. I agree that sometimes increasing the timeline
of something is not a bad thing because you have found cool new stuff. I wanted to call Rachel in
because Rachel had a question when we were chatting with you before. Rachel, would you like
to ask that? Sure. I'm trying to remember which question. It might be the one I was just thinking
about right now, which is, Mike, I think when we were chatting, we talked a little bit about
Positron and that led us down a path of like, how do you support people in the cool new things that
they always want to use? Do you have a lot of people who are always coming and asking you for
the latest and greatest? Is there a process for people getting things approved to use in your
environment? I think one of the most impactful questions we can ask as data scientists is,
what's the impact or why are we doing something, right? Is there business value for doing this?
Is it a quality of life improvement for our developers? Is it allowing us to answer more
questions from the data that we have? Before we decide either what tool to use or whether to
introduce a new tool, that's the question we always try to anchor to. Let's take Positron,
for example, where we haven't yet switched folks over in part because we used Posit Team and Posit
Workbench as a way to, en masse, allow users to have their development environment pre-specified
for them. That said, we try not to be overly prescriptive on what tools are supported. We
want to work with users to hear their feedback on what we think is a good approach forward or
what others have suggested to us to hopefully move in that hub and spoke so that most of the folks
along the various spokes feel well supported as we decide on which tools to introduce and when.
So, that's a little bit of the concept. I'm happy to dig into anything deeper, too.
Yeah. Is it the same way with individual packages, too?
Yes. We don't have a formal intake process for, let's say, someone wants to use a new package,
but let's say we are adding a new dependency to our core sets of projects, then, yeah, we'll have
very intentional decisions around whether we want to do something. Coming back to the example we
talked about earlier, Excel templates, we are recognizing with Word in Corto that's really
well supported and that's not something we need to worry about as much investing and maintaining
going forward. But if we are building out our own in-house R functions that wrap something like
OpenXLSX or FlexLSX, then we need to be comfortable assuming some amount of maintenance cost going
forward and we need to have the right expertise internally and we need to feel confident that
is something we can sustain before introducing. So, I think a high school guidance teacher once
said we can take any course that you want, but you can't take them all and it's very much the
same in the tooling space of you can use whatever tool you want, but you can't use them all and you
can't always support them all well. So, it's a matter of making your trade-offs that allow you
to maximize your impact, maximize your focus. Thank you. Thank you, Rachel. All right. I saw
a question from Rodrigo in Slido. It has a little asterisk, though. That means I will read it for
you, Rodrigo. And Rodrigo was asking about, like, he sees the value of reproducible Corto slash
R Markdown for creating a draft of a paper and exporting it to Word, but coming back from Word
to Corto is really challenging, especially if there are, like, comments or tracking changes
if people want to edit things, and he was wondering if you had that particular challenge
in your work and how you go about it. He also mentioned the Redock package. Don't know if
you've ever experimented with it. I don't think we've asked the question of how to go back from
Word to Corto and the source code. Eric, I'm not sure if you've thought more about this.
Sorry, I was trying to unmute. No, I don't think we have. I know that one of the discussions before
was about, like, the lack of commenting in Corto, because I know that feature is used in
Google Docs and Word, but we haven't really explored going from Corto to Word. But a
commenting feature would be cool. Yeah, if anybody has experience with that, thoughts about that,
put them in the chat. That, as a person who used to do freelancing, that's a really big thing,
right? Like, you have very frequently a non-technical audience who is wanting to give feedback on
things and do them in their own time, and transferring that back is much harder to do.
Just in general, this is not a Corto problem. This is, like, an in general,
you are creating something with code and collaborating with people who do not code
type of problem. Thank you, Rodrigo, for your question, and I put the link to Redoc,
the Redoc package, in the chat if anybody wants to take a look at it.
Okay. Oh, go ahead. I would add a little bit to that. We have certainly thought about this and
how do you create collaboration norms with folks, because I agree. Like, generating the code and
generating the insights is one aspect, but where a lot of our scientific and clinical input happens
is in the outputs thereafter, and that's typically in Word or Excel, and so we've
thought a lot about commenting in Corto, and is that possible and something we could do
through PositConnect, but I understand that that's an area of active development, and
it's hard to combine the Google Docs aspects of live collaboration with the reproducible R aspects
or Python aspects that happen in Corto, but definitely an area relevant to data science
collaboration. One solution that I have seen happen frequently is just like, hey, non-technical
person, I'm going to teach you how to use GitHub, because Corto files are just text files, and maybe
we can add stuff to them in GitHub and then submit those as PRs or issues or things like that,
and that has ended up sometimes working okay. Again, GitHub is a great place to collaborate.
All right. We always try to ask a career advice question by the end of our session, and I saw one
in Slido, so let's do that. There's an anonymous one that says, what does a typical work day look
like for you? I'd love to hear that, and then I'll ask you a little career advice question.
Yeah. I am located in San Francisco, and I actually moved here in 20,
fun fact, I moved here by meeting some people on a plane who introduced me to their son,
whose company I then ended up working at, and so I never intended to be on the West Coast,
but my team is all on the East Coast, and so my mornings are usually starting with coffee,
taking a moment to warm up for the day, and then hopping into meetings, and then my afternoons
are typically more deep-thinking time, able to dive into some coding or dive into some
problem-solving and review. That is a really fun origin story. I feel like I need a reiteration of
that. You met somebody on a plane, and their son worked for a company, and you ended up working for
that company? Yes. Yeah. I helped them get connected to airplane Wi-Fi, so then I ended
up chatting with their son, who had a very similar background in economics and math.
This is amazing. This is just a great example of why talking with other human beings is so
important, and that is hilarious and amazing. I love it so much. Okay, well, our career question
is, is there a piece of career advice that has either really, really helped you, you've really
liked, that you try to give to other people, that you mentor people on your team?
I think something I always anchor to is, think about what problems need to be solved, and then
come up with solutions against those problems. Importantly, as you grow and as you stretch,
think about what problems people aren't trying to solve yet, or what is a solution that someone
hasn't yet been able to come up with to solve that problem that they care deeply about. Being
able to connect with people on the problems they care about allows you to be a clear partner,
be an innovative technologist as needed to match their solutions. For me, it's all about
collaboration and aligning on the problem to solve before jumping into anything else.
Do you recommend getting to know your end users and your stakeholders and stuff for all of your
people on your teams? Yeah, that's the most important thing. If you build a tool
and people don't use it, then you haven't really been successful in building that tool.
Being close to the people who need it is the most important thing, and they're ultimately
the measure of success. If they're using it to deliver better science, then you've done your
job well. Right. Yeah, then you contributed to delivering better science. That's the whole part
of understanding the business problem, right? You've got to understand it from the perspective
of the person who has the problem if you want to help solve it. All right. This was a wonderful
chat. We have one minute left, so I will say we must move on and say goodbye. Just a reminder to
everybody, there's no Hangout next week. We are at PositConf next week. Well, I'm not. I'm here
in my house, but I will be doing all kinds of PositConf stuff. Mike, thank you so much for
hanging out with us. This was wonderful. I hope you had a good time, too. Yeah,
likewise. Thanks for having me. I'm looking forward to chatting more with you all.
Yeah. Erica and Anthony, who work with Mike, thank you for being here,
both unmuting and in the chat. I saw Anthony in the chat answering questions.
If there are some topics that we talked about today that you would like to see us talk about
in future Hangouts, fill out that survey after we leave and let us know. We would love to take
that into consideration. It was so nice seeing everybody's face today. I will see you in two
weeks' time for another Hangout, but I will hopefully see you next week and this weekend
on the Discord server for PositConf. Okay, so everybody go find me on the Discord server. Say
I'm from the Hangout, and I will make your name yellow as part of the Data Science Hangout crew.
Okay? All right. Goodbye. Thanks so much. Yeah, save the chat. Top of the chat, three dots.
I'll stay here for another second. Oh, Benjamin, you're asking where is the PositConf Discord?
Log in to the event platform. There will be a little thing there that says join the Discord,
and you can click that. I recommend logging into Discord first. Otherwise,
you might create a temporary Discord account. Okay, everybody.
And Libby, just so everybody knows, that's if you go to the conference page and go to...
I just want to make sure everybody knows how to get into that portal.
Yes. You've got to go to posit.co slash conference, and there will be a button that
says register slash log in. You click that button, log in, or register for the conference
virtually, and then you will be able to get in there. Yeah. All right, Benjamin,
find me on the Discord server. Bye, everybody. Bye, everybody. See ya.